Linux Shell and Shell Scripting
If we are using any major operating system, we are indirectly interacting with the shell. While running Ubuntu, Linux Mint, or any other Linux distribution, we are interacting with the shell by using the terminal.

A shell is a special user program that provides an interface for the user to use operating system services. Shell accepts human-readable commands from users and converts them into something which the kernel can understand. It is a command language interpreter that executes commands read from input devices such as keyboards or from files. The shell gets started when the user logs in or starts the terminal.

Shell is broadly classified into two categories –
Command Line Shell
Graphical shell

There are several command line shells available for Linux systems like –
BASH (Bourne Again SHell) – It is the most widely used shell in Linux systems. It is used as default login shell in Linux systems and in macOS. It can also be installed on Windows OS.
CSH (C SHell) – The C shell’s syntax and its usage are very similar to the C programming language.
KSH (Korn SHell) – The Korn Shell was also the base for the POSIX Shell standard specifications etc.

What is a terminal?
A program which is responsible for providing an interface to a user so that he/she can access the shell. It basically allows users to enter commands and see the output of those commands in a text-based interface.


Ubuntu is derived from Debian Linux. Debian uses dpkg packaging system.

What is a package? - A Package in linux is a compressed archived file containing all the files included with a software application.

There are several ways to install software/package on linux/ubuntu:
1. Ubuntu Software Center (GUI)
2. Synaptic Package Manager (GUI) - Introduced in Linux 16 - Claims to be more stable and secure
3. Terminal (apt or snap)
4. Manual download of deb package and then using dpkg command.


Best way - apt (Previously apt-get)

But first, let's learn the historical way of doing this i.e apt-get

apt-get (APT - Advanced Package Tool)
It is a set of command line tools that allow you to install, remove and update deb packages installed via APT in debian based linux.
It makes it easier compared to using dpkg command directly.

There are 2 main tools around APT: apt-get(install, upgrade and remove) and apt-cache (finding new packages)

apt-get basically works on the database of available packages. We need to update this database so that our system knows about any new
version of packages. For this, we do - sudo apt-get update
Once you have this database updated, you need to apply those upgrades on the packages installed on your system. To upgrade all, run -
sudo apt-get upgrade

We can combine these 2 commands like this - sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade -y

Installing a package
sudo apt-get install <package-name>
auto-completion is supported while searching for package name
If you run install on already existing package, it'll just upgrade if newer version is available in the database.

Removing a package
sudo apt-get remove <package-name>
sudo apt-get purge <package-name>

Difference - remove just removes the binaries of the package. purge removes everything related to package, including config files.
So if you re-install a package which you "remove" earlier, it'll use same config files. (You'll have option to override though)


apt command (Introduced in Ubuntu 14, but widely used from 16)
Why was apt introduced?
Previouly, in order to interact with APT, we had to switch between apt-get and apt-cache and others. Also, a lot of functionalities
of these 2 commands were not being used. apt was introduced as a single command to have commanly used options of both.



free -t -m
command to list RAM status


Command to list all packages installed using apt
comm -23 <(apt-mark showmanual | sort -u) <(gzip -dc /var/log/installer/initial-status.gz | sed -n 's/^Package: //p' | sort -u)


Default File system in most linux distro - ext4 (Released in 2006)
Red Hat Enterprise 7 has XFS as default
Other file system - btrfs
These 3 are best File Systems


